Package Yanking Guidance (#51)
ossf/wg-securing-software-repos: docs/package-deletion-policies.md

# Crafting a Package Deletion Policy

Author: [Hayley Denbraver](https://www.github.com/hayleycd)
Last updated: April 2025

## Background

> In 2016 after a dispute about the naming of an open source package, a maintainer deleted all the packages he had published to npm, including a small package called `left-pad`.

Reviewer: RE: my point about shared terminology -- it might be good to define the personas/actor names. On NuGet we have:
- site admin
- package owner (sometimes package author)
- package consumer

The term `maintainer` seems to be a little overloaded in this document. Perhaps
- registry maintainer
- package maintainer
- package consumer

But I am not sure. I guess my point goes back to well-defined roles with unambiguous names used throughout the doc.

Reviewer 2: Looks like @hayleycd has mostly disambiguated the term 'maintainer' here. This makes me think the WG should have a general glossary, and align it's various docs around it, but that's probably out of scope for this project.

Reviewer: I was thinking the same thing. a mega synonym table mapping concept across ecosystem would be so nerdy, and so cool

Reviewer 2: Moving this to https://github.com/ossf/wg-securing-software-repos/issues/52, thanks!

Although `left-pad` was only about a dozen lines of code, it had impressive reach.
Prior to removal, it had over 15 million downloads and was used by thousands of open source projects--including many that are critical to the npm ecosystem.
The deletion of `left-pad` caused build failures for projects large and small and rendered a large portion of the internet unnavigable. Npm made the decision to republish the package.

[After the `left-pad` incident](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Npm_left-pad_incident), npm updated their package deletion policy to prevent similar failures and other package managers followed suit.
In the over 9 years since the incident, package managers have continued to adjust their package deletion policies to balance the sometimes competing interests of open source maintainers, open source consumers, and the package ecosystem itself.

This paper outlines the components of modern package deletion policies.
It is not meant to be a sample deletion policy, but a list of things to consider when crafting such a policy including package deletion alternatives.

> ## Deletion Policy Considerations

Reviewer 2: I think this is worth mentioning! (e.g. on PyPI, a project cannot be owner-less, so there is a difference there)

> ## Deletion Policy Considerations

Author: I made some changes to address this.

* Allowing for unrestricted package deletion could result in build failures like those seen in the `left-pad` incident, malicious packages snapping up a recently vacated namespace, and other undesirable behavior.

So when crafting a deletion policy, we want to stay away from the two extremes, but what needs to be considered?

Whether or not a package manager allows for users to delete packages in some cases, it should allow for the package manager maintainers to manually intervene and delete packages.
This allows the maintainer team to protect the ecosystem from malicious, abusive, illegal, or copyrighted content.

But what if a user wants to delete a package they published?
Although it's possible to require such cases to go to the maintainer team to be manually reviewed and removed, that is not a very efficient policy.
Such a policy would place a burden on the (already likely overworked) maintainer team, and the ecosystem would be cluttered with the unwanted packages until they are manually removed.

Allowing a user to delete their package in certain cases is therefore good for the user, the package manager maintainer team, and the package ecosystem at large.

> But what factors need to be considered to avoid a `left-pad` style incident?

Reviewer: ... while still avoiding illegal or unsafe content.

I think you have to hold both in each hand, pretty much all the time. For example if we had to left-pad the world because of some DMCA'd or malicious content, I think you'd have to as the repo admin.

NuGet.org has deleted relatively popular content that we found was infringing copyright.

> ## Ecosystem Impact

Reviewer: Seems like another top- level section is scope of deletion. On NuGet you can delete an entire package name, or just one or more versions.

A policy could vary on whether the latest version is being deleted or whether all the versions are being deleted, etc.

That maybe you are already saying this and I am misunderstanding terminology. It might be worth qualifying at the top of the document that a package refers to all of the versions and a version refers to a single release. Or something like that!

Reviewer 2: Agreed, a section about the various options for "granularity of deletion" would make sense to include, but maybe not in this section.

A modern package deletion policy aims to minimize the impact a given deletion could have on the ecosystem, while granting users some flexibility with their packages.

The following considerations are generally used when determining whether a package is a good candidate for deletion, although specific limits and criteria will vary between package managers.

### Time

How long ago was the package published?
Although time since publication is not a perfect metric for ecosystem impact (maybe a package has been around for years but only has a handful of users), there are a number of use cases where this metric is very relevant.
For example, the user could have:

* Published the wrong package
* Published the package with an unintended name (or a typo)
* Published a test package to understand and experience the package publishing process

In these cases, it is very useful for the package manager to have a no hassle deletion policy as long as the package has been published for less than a certain amount of time.
For instance, npm allows maintainers to delete their packages within the first 72 hours after publication.
After 72 hours additional criteria must be met.

> ### Downloads

Reviewer: Might want to make this a little more generic or qualify in the paragraph. Usage statistics vary from ecosystem to ecosystem. For example VS Code uses Installs. In NuGet, we know not all downloads are created equal. Perhaps it's worth saying how you assess the breadth of package usage may vary by ecosystem.

How many times has the package been downloaded?
Package download statistics provide an indication of how widely the package has been adopted with the ecosystem.
Deleting a package with less than 50 downloads will have a smaller impact than deleting a package with 5,000 downloads, or 500,000 downloads, or 5 million downloads.
Setting a maximum number of downloads a package can have to be eligible for deletion is a great way to ensure minimal ecosystem impact.
For example, npm's limit is 300 downloads within the previous week.

Download counts are not a perfect way to account for the package's impact on the ecosystem.
They can be arbitrarily inflated and might vary over time.
Download counts are best used in conjunction with other criteria in evaluating whether a given package should be eligible for deletion.

### Dependency Status

Is the package under consideration a dependency of other packages within the ecosystem?
How many?

> Is _that_ package a dependency of another package (making the package to be deleted a transitive dependency)?

Author: That makes a lot of sense, but I guess I would be curious about the download numbers of those packages, etc. To me this feels like a circumstance where they might need to reach out to the admins directly. I am leaving it out for now, but if it is really important to the team, I can put it in.

> Is _that_ package a dependency of another package (making the package to be deleted a transitive dependency)?

Reviewer: For NuGet the download count of dependency packages is incremented along with the parent packages. This means if there is a core package in an isolated subgraph like "MyObsurePackageGraph.Core", it might have a relatively high download count but in fact just be pumped by the size of the graph moreso than the popularity of the package. 

I think the wording is fine as-is since the depth of package graphs is probably an ecosystem specific thing, and whether subgraphs are often published by a single author is also ecosystem specific. 

Feel free to resolve! And thanks for hearing me out :)

They can delete the original repository, but a copy of the project will remain on the proxy server.
Instead, Go uses a [retract directive](https://go.dev/ref/mod#go-mod-file-retract), which is an example of a [package deletion alternative](#deletion-alternatives).

### Test Instances and Staging Environments

Another architecture decision related to a package deletion policy is the use of a separate test instance or a staging environment.

For example PyPI maintains [TestPyPI](https://test.pypi.org/) to allow users to try distribution tools and processes without affecting the real PyPI.
A test instance does not necessarily eliminate the need for a package deletion policy because mistakes can still be made, but it does allow for users to experiment without leaving junk packages on the main instance.

## Deletion Alternatives

There are a number of reasons that a person would want to delete a package.
Package deletion is a good solution for some of those reasons (publishing the wrong package, making a typo, experimenting with the package manager), but not necessarily for others.

What if a package (or version series) is no longer in active development?

> What if a specific version has a security issue?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What if a specific version has a security issue or a severe bug?
```

We have received many deletion requests for a bugged release. We generally recommend unlisting (seems akin to yanking, as you have described below).

In these cases, the community should be informed of the issues, and possibly prevented from using a specific version, but deleting the package outright is not a tenable solution.
So what can package managers do in these cases?

### Yanking

> "Yanking" refers to soft deleting a compromised package version.

Reviewer 2: I think "soft deleting" is probably the wrong term to use here. If "deleting" means "the package is completely gone", "soft deleting" would be "the package is completely gone, but can be fully restored as it was prior to deletion".

Yanking is even softer than soft deletion, because in many ways, the package still exists. A better way to describe this may be something like "yanking is a way to deprioritize an installer's preference for a given release or file, relative to other releases or files in a project".

Reviewer 3: I agree with @di that the terminology should be clear. I would use the term "package manager" not "package installer" for the local software used to install/uninstall/maintain the software; I think package manager is the more common term.

In some ecosystems the list of managed packages (what I would call the package registry or package index) is separate from where the packages are stored (what I would call package repository). In some other cases one system fulfills both roles, which leads to confusion. I suspect in most cases the concern should focus on the package registry (aka package index) - if it's gone from the *repository* then you can't get it at all.

Author: Ah ok. That will clarify things. I'll take a quick look through the report and update terms.

Reviewer: I agree we need to formalized wording. To me, yanking is unclear and we use the term deletion to refer to soft deletion in NuGet (with a very rare hard deletion). For us, soft deletion means it is really deleted, but we still have a record of it and the package name is blocked.

I have found that soft delete and hard delete are commonly used in software engineering such as database design so it's easier to describe that for packages. But as long as we define terminology at the talk of the document, I think we can go with whatever and even provide comparisons on common ecosystems like list of synonyms even.

The version still exists, but by marking the version as yanked, installers will ignore the version unless it is the only release that matches a version specifier.

> If the yanked version is explicitly required, it will be installed and will not break the build.

Reviewer: Oh weird, for this feature we call it unlisting on NuGet and unpublishing on VS Marketplace.

Yanking doesn't sound at all appropriate for malicious or illegal content if it can still be downloaded.

Author: Yeah, "yanking" is an alternative to deletion. So I would agree, malicious, illegal, or copyrighted content shouldn't be "yanked" but removed entirely.

Maintainers should consider yanking a release if it is broken, unstable, or contains a very severe vulnerability.

> Yanking will not completely guarantee that no one is using the compromised version, but it will reduce the prevalence of the corrupted version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Yanking will not completely guarantee that no one is using the yanked version, but it will reduce the installer preference to install it.
```

If an ecosystem allows for version yanking, it is best practice to also allow maintainers to provide a reason.
Users who are explicitly requiring the yanked version can then appropriately prioritize moving to a non-yanked version.

Some version yanking policies use slightly different terminology but are functionally very similar.
For example, Go uses the term "retract" and the retract directive can indicate that a package version (or version range) should not be used.

Regardless of the term used, the following sets these policies apart from a deletion policy in the following ways:

1. The yanked version is still available.
2. The installer will try to avoid using yanked versions.
3. The package consumer can make an informed decision about whether to use the yanked version.
4. Yanking a version will not break a build.

> ### Deprecation

Reviewer: You could maybe lump end of life status as part of this. In many contexts the two are used interchangeably but on ecosystem to ecosystem. For the purposes of this document, I think they can be lumped together to improve comprehension.

Software projects are not supported forever.
When the maintainer/maintainer team is no longer willing to support a specific version series or an entire project, the team can mark the project as deprecated.
Generally, deprecated projects are available for installation and can be continued to be used.
Marking a project as deprecated allows users to make an informed decision about the use of the package.
Going forward, the user knows that not only can they not expect any new features, but they can't even expect continued compatibility with other projects or security updates.

Similar to version yanking policies, deprecation policies could use slightly different languages including terms like 'end of life' or mention moving to the next major version.
Regardless of the terms used, with a deprecation policy:

1. The deprecated version/package is still available for installation.
2. The user is informed of the deprecation and can make an informed decision about continuing to use the package or version.
3. The build will not break.

> ## A Comprehensive Policy

Reviewer: Some other ideas we can consider here: 

Have a public list of deleted packages allowing auditors, tooling, proxies or replicas to react or propagate the deletion. I believe GH has/had a public DMCA list that i think we all should respect 🙂 (it is inspirational).

Recommend having deletion policies qualified on illegal versus malicious versus author request. At least for NuGet some of the considerations go away if the content is illegal. We will delete popular illegal content.

> ## A Comprehensive Policy

Reviewer: Deletion intersects with package immutability as well (which is its own topic of course). But it might be worth recommending that deleted package versions are not replaced and a new release should be made. Or at least a decision point to consider.

For NuGet, we consider a package name + version as immutable and hard deletion of a version opens up the door for package mutability, which can break tooling/caching/replication assumptions.

### Dependency Status

Is the package under consideration a dependency of other packages within the ecosystem?
How many?
Is _that_ package a dependency of another package (making the package to be deleted a transitive dependency)?

If other packages within the ecosystem depend on the package to be deleted, that is direct proof that deletion would cause ecosystem harm.
A package registry administrator team could choose whatever threshold they like, but many package registries choose to not allow for deletion of dependent packages at all.

### Maintainer Status

Many package deletion policies will not allow packages with more than one maintainer to be deleted.
Allowing a single maintainer to delete the package could contradict the will of the other maintainers and there is not an uncomplicated way to get the consent of the maintainer team.
Multiple maintainers also implies an increased investment in the project.
Additionally a package registry could differentiate between a "maintainer" and an "owner" and only allow for the package owner to delete the package.

> ## What to do About Namespaces?

Reviewer 4: Term namespace is confusing to me. It is used in various contexts across package repositories. Is there alternative?

Reviewer 4: added to #52 also

Author: You know, I think that is a good point. I am going to rephrase.

4. Yanking a version will not break a build.

### Deprecation

Software projects are not supported forever.
When the maintainer/maintainer team is no longer willing to support a specific version series or an entire project, the team can mark the project as deprecated.
Generally, deprecated projects are available for installation and can be continued to be used.
Marking a project as deprecated allows users to make an informed decision about the use of the package.
Going forward, the user knows that not only can they not expect any new features, but they can't even expect continued compatibility with other projects or security updates.

Similar to version yanking policies, deprecation policies could use slightly different languages including terms like 'end of life' or mention moving to the next major version.
Regardless of the terms used, with a deprecation policy:

1. The deprecated version/package is still available for installation.
2. The user is informed of the deprecation and can make an informed decision about continuing to use the package or version.
3. The build will not break.

## A Comprehensive Policy

> A package deletion policy should take into account the needs of open source maintainers, open source consumers, the package registry maintainer team, and the ecosystem at large.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A package deletion policy should take into account the needs of open source maintainers, open source consumers, the package registry administrators, and the ecosystem at large.
```
```suggestion
A package deletion policy should take into account the needs of open source maintainers, open source consumers, the package registry administration team, and the ecosystem at large.
```
